Translator: VICTOR AWOYEMI
Reviewer: Alina Siluyanova
We make three mistakes:
the first is underestimating the quantity
of information that we produce every day;
the second is depreciating
the value of that information;
and the third is thinking
that our principal problem
is a distant and super powerful agency
that is called NSA.
And it is true that NSA
has the major access, better resources,
the best tools,
but they don't need any of that
to spy on us,
because we have everything there;
we live in glass houses.
This is Malte Spitz, a member
of the German Green Party.
In 2009, Malte asked
his telephone company
to send him all the data they had on him.
And the Deutsche Telekom,
which was his company, told him no.
Two lawsuits later, they sent him a CD
with an Excel table of 30,832 lines;
like "The War and the Peace",
but three times larger.
This endless document
contains information
from September of 2009
to February of 2010;
it has exactly six months.
This isn't accidental, it has six months
because in the summer of 2008
the European Union presented
the Data Retention Directive,
where they demanded
each telephone company
with more than 10,000 clients
keep the data of all their clients
for a minimum of six months
and a maximum of two years.
They gave Malte data
of 6 months, as if saying,
"This is everything we have
because the law forces us."
They probably owe him a year and half.
Malte, who couldn't process
this amount of information,
sent it to a weekly magazine
which, in turn, contacted
a data visualization agency
to do something with it.
They took the data from Deutsche Telekom
and Malte's public information,
like, for example, information
from his Twitter account or his blog.
And with this they created the map
that you are looking at now,
that is more than a map,
it is more like a creepy automatic diary
of Malte's life.
We can see when he catches a train,
which he's doing right now,
when he stops, where he stays,
when he goes, how he goes,
how much time it takes him,
when he is eating,
when he is sleeping,
like right now;
when he takes a flight,
who calls him, how long they speak,
who sends him messages,
what are the messages.
We see everything.
This is on the Internet. You can see it.
The reason why this happens
is because Malte
has a mobile in his pocket
that every five minutes makes a "ping"
to the closest antenna and tells it,
"Do you have something for me?
Do I have mail?
Do I have any WhatsApp messages?
Has something happened in the world?"
Raise your hand if you have a mobile
in your pocket that does the same.
Every five minutes
our mobiles are saying,
"I'm here, I'm here, now I'm here,
hey, I'm here..."
That's what happens.
And this doesn't have precedents.
We didn't have this before.
The direct equivalent of that
is what we have now on the screen.
This is the profile of a person
watched by the Stasi for years.
Looks like a napkin, doesn't it?
With 46 posts including
his aunt, the milkman,
the priest of his church --
These are five minutes
in the life of Malte Spitz,
and this information is automatic.
And the worst thing is that
this is only the data on Malte,
but Malte is surrounded by people
like us with mobiles like his
that are producing the same information;
and that company sees everything.
This is a photo made
by my colleague Juanlu Sánchez,
a photo from manifestation 15-M.
But let's look at it from a
telecommunications' viewpoint.
This square is full with mobiles.
Using those mobiles we can know
exactly who is at the square,
almost as if we put a cordon around;
with names and surnames.
And not only we know when they have come,
where they come from and with whom,
whom they leave with, whom they call to;
we know everything about them.
We even know if they are on the 4th floor
or down at the square.
This is how that photo is seen
by an algorithm of traffic analysis.
And here we begin to see some cool stuff.
We see that not all the people
at the square are the same.
There are people
more important than others,
and if we have control
over these telecommunications,
this network, we can do things,
like turning off the nodes
on this square,
in other words, isolate those who gather
others around them from the rest.
Also we can do what the Ukrainian
government did about a year and half ago:
send out a message saying,
"Dear user, you've been registered
as a participant in a massive
illegal manifestation."
We don't behave the same
when we know that we are watched.
Since Jeremy Bentham we know
that the best way to watch a population
is for them not to know
when they are watched and when not.
In Malte's case,
during those 6 months,
they were watching him
for 78 percent of the time.
And we're only talking about our mobiles.
We are not talking about our computers,
nor the cameras that are on the streets,
in the stores and shop-windows,
in the airports and trains,
and wherever we are, being watched.
We are not talking
about the radars on the roads
that register us if we overspeed.
We are not talking about
what we have in a wallet.
How many personal identification chips
do we have in a wallet?
We have a lot: an ID card,
a driving license or a transport ticket,
credit or debit cards, reward cards.
A supermarket reward card.
20 years ago, the biggest
personal data base in the world
was not owned by NSA,
neither by the Stasi, poor thing.
It was owned by Wal-Mart,
the American supermarket chain.
Why? Because when they
give you a reward card,
what you're doing is telling a company
who you are, where you live,
how much you earn, what you buy,
what you eat, how many kids you have,
when you go on vacations,
when you get sick.
And all this we give them
hoping that in six months or in a year,
if we spend a lot of money,
they'll give us a Tupperware.
(Laughter)
And it's not different from
what we do on the Internet,
because Deutsche Telekom
is a legit European company
that has to obey the Data Protection Law,
the same way as Telef贸nica.
Telef贸nica, here, has to obey
the data protection laws,
but it's not the same with the companies
that make mobiles, operative systems,
offer us "free" mails,
give those apps that we download
and ask us for access to a bunch
of strange things, and we say,
"They might need it for something."
They need it to sell it.
Why would Angry Birds
want to have access to your GPS?
To make money!
Our observers don't care
if we are nobody,
if we are unimportant,
because they're algorithms, not people.
And our profiles are automatic;
they exist even if nobody looks at it.
And the day somebody looks at it
and changes your fate,
your profile, your history,
becomes your record.
You can end up being stuck at the airport
in one of the 75 countries
where being homosexual is illegal.
Or you could end up in a country
where taking a picture of a pharmacy
of mass production from the other side
of the street is terrorism;
this happens in the United States.
Or you could end up in Syria,
where people are shot on the streets;
activists, especially journalists.
You could end up in Mexico, D.F.,
where the Zetas use their access
to the information of phone companies
to see who contacts the police
and cut their heads.
There are thousands of ways to be
in the wrong place at the wrong time,
and sometimes
you don't even have to move.
In Holland they had a census.
It was a census that included religions
with high devotion rates in the world.
They wanted to know how many
Protestants, Catholics, Jews they had
to know how much money
they had to put in each community,
in each church or synagogue.
What happened? When the Nazis came,
they had their homework done.
Only 10 percent of the Dutch Jews
survived in the Second World War.
If that database hadn't exist,
the figures would've been very different.
What I mean is that
our problem isn't the NSA,
neither our corrupt governments,
neither ambitious companies
that want to sell our data,
neither bad people,
and it has nothing to do
with their intentions,
nor with their bad intentions.
The problem is that the very existence
of that information
makes us vulnerable in the ways
that we can't anticipate right now.
We have to put curtains in our houses;
we can't expect
that somebody will do it for us.
We have to put them now.
We have to start using cryptography
in our mobiles,
in our communications, in our computers.
Start thinking twice every time
someone offers us a reward card,
and say, "Mmm..."
Not only for us, because
besides everything,
this state of surveillance
is one of the worst sicknesses
that a democracy has.
So, I invite you,
upon your arrival back home,
start using Tor,
and if someone wants to see
what you are doing,
he should ask for a search warrant.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)